=============================================
oneIPL Technical Advisory Board Meeting Notes
=============================================

2022-02-17
==========

Slides:

* `oneIPL TAB #3`_

Attendees:

* Svetlana Podogova (Intel)
* Victor Getmanskiy (Intel)
* Mark Rabotnikov (Philips)
* Ashish Uthama (Mathworks)
* Robert Schneider (Siemens Healthineers)
* Sergey Ivanov (Intel, OpenCV/G-API)
* Maksim Shabunin (Intel, OpenCV)
* Valentin Kubarev  (Intel)
* Dmitriy Budnikov  (Intel)


Agenda:

* Introduction and Results of previous discussion of oneIPL API
* oneIPL Memory allocation and temporary images
* oneIPL Domains
* oneIPL Error handling mechanism
* Closing words and next plans on oneIPL TAB

Introduction and Results of previous discussion of oneIPL API:

* Current provisional spec version is 0.5, the spec 0.6 is in progress and will
  be published soon.

* The main differences between spec ver 0.5 and ver 0.6 are the following:
   * ipl::formats replaced by ipl::layouts
   * Image constructors are changed to remove dependency on implementation
   * Default image allocator will be USM
   * Methods to image auxiliary classes moved to image API
   * Switched to generic template parameters
   * Gaussian filter with separated sigma for x and y axis
   * Normalize without sycl::buffer in spec

* On the previous meeting, the discussion about oneIPL API was started.
  TAB members agreed to take offline review of slide 14 of `oneIPL TAB #2`_
  presentation and to provide the suggestion for the more general API ideas
  and the function naming.

  The offline feedback was collected and processed (see offline feedbacks in
  `oneIPL TAB #2 minutes`_). The following changes were applied to the
  class image for the oneIPL Specification ver 0.6:
  the get_pointer() is replaced by general get_access(args) function, which is
  common for USM and Image (Texture) access abstraction.

  "unspecified" return type of this API is not language-related, but a
  spec-related placeholder for the return type, as per SYCL specification.
  It can be defined differently for particular class specialization in the
  implementation.

  The minimal API approach is applied for Image class per oneIPL TAB feedbacks:
  get_rect(), get_roi() and get_origin() functions are left to get access to
  the necessary part of image, and the size accessors are now moved to the
  roi_rect struct (see slide 7 of `oneIPL TAB #3`_ for the details).

* **Mark Rabotnikov, Philips**: Why do we need get_origin()? Is not it the same
  as image itself?

  **Victor Getmanskiy, Intel**: yes, it may be needed in user kernels to use
  neighbor pixels to process borders for example.
  It is common case for Filters, when you need to access the pixels outside the
  processing area. Also, it may be used to create a different ROI on the same
  origin.


oneIPL Memory Model:

* oneIPL spec supports different type of memory assigned via AllocatorT or
  provided via pointer by user to image constructor: host USM, device USM,
  shared USM and Image (texture) memory.

  USM allocator has a major difference from std::allocator. Allocator cannot be
  constructed without context, so device context is required. It complicates
  the APIs, since allocator has no default constructor.

* Victor Getmanskiy presented the different ways of memory allocation on host
  and device and different types of access and control (see slide 9 for
  details)

* **Ashish Uthama, Mathworks**: What happens at the point of access?
  Is the copy operation performed?

  **Victor Getmanskiy, Intel**: It depends on the allocation and access types:
   * If you have device allocation and memory assess on device -> no copy is
     performed.
   * If you have shared allocator and access for read -> no copy as well, but
     for the write access copy to host would happen after kernel is finished.
   * In image_allocator_t case the memory will be allocated on both host
     and device and access is possible only to write or to read, but not both.
     In case of read no copy to host happen, in case of write copy to host
     would happen after kernel is finished.

* **Ashish Uthama, Mathworks**: Actually is this SYCL limitation? It is not so
  clear: if you have reading only, you do not know if it do the copy or not.
  I prefer the explicit copy operation, so I am wondering if this is
  restriction of SYCL?

  **Victor Getmanskiy, Intel**: For the USM it is possible to implement
  explicit copy, for Image it is not controlled (SYCL limitation). You still
  can explicitly copy USM memory and create image with device_allocator_t over
  memory without copy.

  For Images (Textures) creating an object over device memory is currently not
  possible because of SYCL limitations, the construction from host pointer is
  only available. But we are working on it as well.

* **Ashish Uthama, Mathworks**: I have a question about device context and
  different data allocators usage. For example, If I have integration to a 3rd
  party library, and some data is allocated, is it possible to get the same
  context?

**Victor Getmanskiy, Intel**: This is not done in the library, but there is
  technical possibility to obtain the context, for example CUDA backends in
  oneMKL open-source are capable to work over context of different devices like
  NVIDIA. I think, in this case memory type will be device and mapping over
  such memory with proper queue would create image over memory without extra
  copy operation.

* In spec ver 0.5 default allocator was implementation-defined.
  For compatibility, in spec ver 0.6 the default allocator is selected as
  shared USM.


oneIPL Domains:

* On the slide 15, the domains in blue are currently described in the oneIPL
  Specification, yellow color is to be considered in the future versions of
  spec.

* Color conversion domain includes conversion functions for the main formats,
  the YUV422 and YUV444 to rgb are considered as a possible future extension.

* The Color conversions Domain API's are presented.

* The Filtering Domain in oneIPL spec ver 0.6 includes Sobel filter with the
  fixed 3x3 kernel size and Gaussian filter. Possible future extension of
  oneIPL spec is considered to include Bilateral, Sobel, Filter Box and Filter
  Median.

* The Transformation Domain includes resize functions with bilinear, bicubic,
  lanczos and supersampling interpolation types and also mirroring. Future
  extensions are: the Nearest neighbor Resize and Warp Affine bilinear
  functions.

* **Ashish Uthama, Mathworks**: It makes a lot of sense to take into account
  what are the most useful operations for AI domain. Resize is the major for
  sure, but there are some basic operations for Deep Learning and Neural
  Network operations for training. Augmentation, inference, normalize – need
  to take a look on this domain needs for further Specification extensions.

* There are several directions of future oneIPL Spec extensions were presented,
  the feedback and suggestions for the most important steps are appreciated.

oneIPL Error Handling mechanism:

* The oneIPL Error Handling mechanism relies on the mechanism of C++
  exceptions. The oneIPL additionally has a requirement to implement
  compile-time checks which can be based on template parameters.

* Sync and async exception handling flows were presented. Exception types and
  examples from oneIPL spec were reviewed.


Next plans on oneIPL TAB:

* The next technical meeting for oneIPL TAB is planned for March 3rd (ww10)

* Next topic for the discussion is oneIPL Functions overview.

* After covering the main topics the oneIPL TAB will have meetings once per
  4 weeks.

.. _`oneIPL TAB #3`: ../presentations/2022-02-17_Slides.pdf
.. _`oneIPL TAB #2`: ../presentations/2022-02-03_Slides.pdf
.. _`oneIPL TAB #2 minutes`: 2022_02_17_Minutes.rst
