=============================================
oneMKL Technical Advisory Board Meeting Notes
=============================================

2020-11-11
==========

Materials:

* `Overview of oneMKL Vector Math domain <../presentations/2020-11-11_Slides.pdf>`__

Attendees: 

* Rachel Ertl (Intel)
* Mehdi Goli (Codeplay)
* Sarah Knepper (Intel)
* Andrey Kolesov (Intel)
* Nevin Liber (ANL)
* Piotr Luszczek (UTK)
* Pat Quillen (MathWorks)
* Nichols Romero (ANL)
* Edward Smyth (NAG)
* Andrey Stepin (Intel)
* Shane Story (Intel)

Agenda:

* Welcoming remarks
* Updates from last meeting
* Overview of oneMKL Vector Math domain - Andrey Stepin
* Wrap-up and next steps

Updates from last meeting:

* oneAPI Developer Summit 2020: Nevin Liber will be participating on a panel discussion.
* oneMKL specification v. 1.0 released.
* RNG and BLAS domains available in oneMKL open source interfaces project.

Overview of Vector Math (VM) Domain:

* Vector math allows to accelerate the calculation of values of transcendental functions for vectors of different types, like float, double, and complex types.
* There are different accuracies available which allow users to select between calculation speed and accuracy (up to close to correctly rounded results).
* DPC++ interface based on C++, allows to perform the same capabilities of calculation on the same data types and same types of optimizations as the pre-existing C/Fortran APIs.
* VM has a very nice capability of reporting numerical errors and fixing them on the fly if user desires.
* For example, in calculating the inverse cumulative distribution function, a user may find that some values are outside of the domain of the specified inverse function. Such out-of-domain values can be fixed by the status code handler.

VM APIs:

* Classic C/Fortran APIs are very simple; accept vector length, input and output vectors. Same interface for OpenMP offload.
* DPC++ interfaces have explicit SYCL queues, and either buffers or simple pointers (for USM).

DPC++ Usage Models:

* If user wants to calculate something more than just one function, the buffers handle the dependencies (building the directed acyclic graph).
* For USM, the user needs to care about dependencies themselves.
* USM API has a nice property that it can accept host pointers. If user has device pointers or shared pointers, they are also accepted.  But users need to care about setting explicit dependencies.
* The utility of USM pointers seem to outweigh the convenience of the SYCL buffers.

VM Error Handler:

* Simple use case: calculate some functions and check there were no computational errors.
* User can specify a special option via a flag.  If this flag is specified, the library will register all computational errors that are associated with a queue.
* User also can ask for explicit computational status for every element, like in example 3. Then custom processing can be done to handle computational errors.
* User can replace results that had some error status with a value that is appropriate; for example, replacing INF with FLT_MAX.

Considering future extensions for VM:

* Strided API, which calculates a transcendental function with some stride. For this, USM makes sense, but buffer may not.
* Thinking of extending VM to accept std::vector.
* Also looking forward to improving the computational performance of vector math by allowing so-called kernel fusion. User will program some sequence of operations, and those operations will be fused in that the GPU will not produce additional loads/stores between functions.

* For the strided interface - will that involve a user-provided iterator, or an array of strides?
   * It is pretty limited in that it just has an increment. Basically, it increments the index by a fixed value, and you can place the outputs based on a different increment. The number of calculations is regulated by the length of the vector.
   * Coming from the batched linear algebra world, where you have a batch of matrices, the matrices may not be coming from one big buffer unless the matrices themselves are strided in the same manner.

* Is there functionality to compute sum of absolute value for complex numbers?
   * It does not have such operation, but it could be extended to have this.
