=============================================
oneIPL Technical Advisory Board Meeting Notes
=============================================

2021-11-29
==========

Slides:

* `oneIPL TAB kickoff`_

Attendees:

* Svetlana Podogova (Intel)
* Victor Getmanskiy (Intel)
* Aleksandr Duev (Intel)
* Craig Garland (Intel)
* Alexander Alekhin (Intel)
* Jeff Rogers (Intel)
* Sergey Ivanov (Intel)
* Abhinav Singh (Intel)
* Valentin Kubarev  (Intel)
* Dmitriy Budnikov  (Intel)
* Vladimir Kostarev (Intel)
* Robert Schneider (Siemens Healthineers)
* An Le (Intel)
* Mark Rabotnikov (Philips)
* Maksim Shabunin (Intel)
* Ritesh R Kulkarni (Intel)
* Alison L Richards (Intel)

Agenda:

* Welcome to the oneIPL TAB participants
* oneAPI industry initiative
* oneAPI Technical Advisory Board activity
* Overview of oneIPL
* oneIPL TAB rules and schedule


Welcome to the oneIPL TAB participants:

* Welcome to the oneAPI Technical Advisory Board (or TAB) for Image
  Processing Kickoff meeting We really appreciate you were able to
  join our community and our aim is to make this collaboration as much
  effective as we can.  The goal of todays meeting is to make the
  overview of oneAPI initiative and especially of Image processing
  domain, to describe what kind of collaboration do we expect and to
  follow up with you on future TAB meetings.

* The oneIPL Technical Advisory Board includes experts from Siemens
  Helthineers, Philips, Adobe, Samsung Medison, Sonoscape and
  Xinje. Also the experts form OpenCV, G-API and oneIPL projects are
  invited to the oneIPL TAB.  And today on the bridge also we have a
  lot of people who helped to organize all this activity:

  - IPL managers: Craig Garland who is leading Intel Performance
    Libraries department, which includes not only Image Processing
    team, but Math Kernel Library (oneMKL) and several other
    domains. Svetlana Podogova and Valentin Kubarev - the engineering
    managers of Intel performance libraries for Image and Signal
    Processing.
  - Business Development Group
  - Technical Consulting Engineers

oneAPI industry initiative:

* Nowadays there is a very diverse environment of architectures which
  are widely used. It includes different types of platforms which are
  CPUs, GPUs, FPGAs, specific types of accelerators.  This turns to be
  a difficult task for developers to support all of these
  architectures, so they really require some unified environment that
  allows them to program across all those without deep understanding
  all of details of each architecture.  That is what oneAPI industry
  initiative is targeted for.

* The oneAPI is an open unified standard based specification for
  heterogenous programming which includes DPC++ language spec as a
  core part, Level Zero spec for the system interface for the oneAPI
  languages and libraries and a number of elemets covering different
  domains like maths operations, data processing, video processing and
  now we are preparing to extend it for Image processing area
  also. The initial launch of oneAPI Spec v1 in Sept 2020 and since
  that time the speed of specification development and the number of
  participants in oneAPI community are actively growing.

* More information about oneAPI may be found in `oneAPI home page`_
  and `oneAPI Spec page`_.

oneAPI Technical Advisory Board activity:

* The TAB is the place where the future versions of oneAPI
  specification is discussed. This is invitation-based forum of
  industry experts, who give their inputs to the oneAPI
  Specification. It is very critical to hear the input from different
  companies to adopt the specification and make it unified and meet
  the challenges of Image Processing area.

* There are 3 other TABs in different domains: the first TAB was
  created about 2 years ago for DPC++ language and library, then
  oneMKL (Math Kernel Libraries) TAB started in May 2020, and AI TAB
  (oneDNN and oneCCL) is active since Feb 2021. More information about
  TABs may be found in `oneAPI TAB GitHub`_.

* The goal of oneIPL TAB is to review and collect feedback on oneIPL
  spec. Make the new specification to address the challenges of Image
  Processing development and adjust it to the industry needs This
  input will help to shape its next revisions.

* The latest version of oneIPL Spec is published on `oneIPL Spec
  page`_.

Overview of oneAPI Image Processing Library (oneIPL):

* Victor Getmanskiy presented the high level overview of
  oneIPL. oneIPL provides the DPC++ API for image processing
  functionality, which is inherited from classic Intel Integrated
  Performance Primitives (Intel IPP) and is supporting xPU
  execution. So all oneIPL DPC++ API contains CPU optimized kernels,
  GPU optimized kernels and could be also extended to support other
  xPU optimisations in future.

* oneIPL API provides C++ abstraction over image data which maps to
  the most accelerated memory available for the format and data type:
  Host memory, Shared memory, Device memory or partially Device tiled
  memory.

* oneIPL API is based on DPC++ and sycl::queue to be able to construct
  pipelines of image processing and include any oneAPI API calls based
  on DPC++ queue targeted to different xPUs. Calls are asynchronous
  and scheduled by runtime for the target devices.

* Currently the provisional oneIPL Spec v0.5 is published. It contains
  all functionality which is targeted for oneIPL first beta release
  in 2022. The functionality contains most commonly used functions
  like Geometry transformations (Resizing, mirroring), Color
  conversions (RGB to Plane, RGB to NV12), Filtering, Type conversion
  and other functions.

* The list of topics for the first technical discussions are listed in
  `oneIPL TAB kickoff`_.

oneIPL TAB rules and schedule:

* DO NOT share any confidential information or trade secrets with the
  group

* Focus on high level dicsussion of oneIPL Specification - not on the
  implementation details

* Please submit the feedback in writing on GitHub in accordance to
  `oneAPI Contribution Guidelines`_. This will allow Intel to further
  upstream your feedback to other standards bodies, including The
  Khronos Group SYCL specification.

* The oneIPL TAB will be 1-hour meeting per 2 weeks while discussing
  main content of Spec v0.5

* Will move to 1 meeting per 4 weeks after the main topics are covered

* Thechnical expert (any TAB member) presents the proposal to spec the
  group is discussing the topic and collecting feedback

* All the materials and meeting minutes will be published on `oneAPI
  TAB GitHub`_.

* The offline feedback from oneIPL TAB members will be also processed
  and discussed on next meeting

* The first technical meeting for oneIPL TAB is planned for December
  16th. Then we will make a New Year holidays and start bi-weekly
  series of meeting from January 20th (ww4) or February 3rd (ww6) - TBD

* For the mid-area topics the cross-component TAB could be
  organized. The first Cross TAB session is planned to December 14th -
  the invitation is sent to oneIPL TAB Members. Feel free to attend.

.. _`oneAPI Contribution guidelines`: https://spec.oneapi.io/versions/latest/introduction.html#contribution-guidelines
.. _`oneAPI TAB GitHub`: https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-tab
.. _`oneAPI home page`: https://www.oneapi.io/
.. _`oneAPI Spec page`: https://www.oneapi.io/spec/
.. _`oneIPL Spec page`: https://spec.oneapi.io/oneipl/latest/index.html
.. _`oneIPL TAB kickoff`: ../presentations/2021-11-29_Slides.pdf
